docs: klip-42 - Schema Migrations Tool (#6721)
confluentinc/ksql: design-proposals/klip-42-schema-migrations-tool.md

syntax is exclusively to ksqlDB; tools require JDBC support; and tools have several features that we cannot support
(i.e. transactions & databases); so this integration becomes complex or unsupported. For that reason, ksqlDB must have its own
schema migrations tool to provide the same migrations benefits to users who want to easily deploy and automate ksqlDB schema
changes in all their ksqlDB environments.

These benefits include:
- Version the ksqlDB schema environments
- Integrate ksqlDB schema changes with CI/CD environments
- Simplify schema evolution changes across different environments

This KLIP proposes a new tool for schema migrations. You will learn about the design aspects of the tool, and the features
to support for a basic schema migration process.

## What is in scope

* Discuss design details for a new tool that provides schema migrations support for ksqlDB

    Basic features to support:
    - New CLI and API that can easily integrate with CI/CD environments
    - Apply migrations on any ksqlDB environments
    - Rollback migrated schemas to previous versions

>     - Version control ksqlDB schema

Reviewer: One other thing that I think would be really useful would be producing a consolidated view of all the statements in one file. Rails, and I think Django, do this so you can see what is going on in one place. This consolidated view is typically checked into version control, and is always treated as read-only. @derekjn had some ideas about how this relates to or could be subsumed by supporting schema dumping.

Author: Is this similar to Flyway's dry-runs feature? https://flywaydb.org/documentation/concepts/dryruns

Author: I talked with @derekjn about this. This is the functionality we expect to have when working on the dump/export command for ksqlDB, which will export all metadata as a SQL file.

* Provide a test plan that validates the new tool will meet the product requirements

> ## What is not in scope

Reviewer: Is squashing (periodically combining all previous migrations into one) out of scope? I don't think it needs to be a v1 thing, but this is historically important because over time, the value of having all migrations around diminishes.

Author: It is out of scope for this tool. The proposal for squashing is to use a different tool that will export the ksqlDB metastore to a SQL file. Squashing will be a combination of exporting the metastore and replace the migrations files with this new file.

If we want to integrate squashing into the migrations tool, then we'll have to support the testing framework (YATT) in order to run every migration in a testing environment, then export the current env as SQL file. We still need the metastore export tool.

Reviewer: Makes sense, SGTM.

  - `Execute entire migrations in a single transaction`

    ksqlDB has support for a transactional metastore. However, this is limited to DDL statements that are persisted in the
    Command topic. But DML statements, such as INSERT, write directly to the topic and do not work with transactions. This disallows
    our tool to provide of a transaction support for the whole migration process. Also, DDL statements may create or delete topics,
    which falls in the non-transactional process.

  - `Support for simulated executions`

>     A sumlation requires the tool to know the current state of the ksqlDB schema before attempting to verify the new migrations scripts. This

Reviewer 2: Typo

to be an internal topic because it will be a user topic. The topic name is: `{clusterID}ksql_{StreamOrTableName}`.

The user can specify a different name for the SCHEMA_VERSION table. This can be done through the tool configuration file. See `Configurations` for more details.

The `MIGRATION_EVENTS` stream will keep track of every migration change (including undo changes). This will contain the history of changes the user has done. Also, this stream
will contain a key to the current version of the schema (specified as `CURRENT` version). Every time a new migration or undo happens, the tool will insert a new event with the
`CURRENT` key pointing to the current version.

This is the `CREATE` statement for the `MIGRATION_EVENTS` stream:
```sql
CREATE STREAM migration_events (
  version_key  STRING KEY,
  version      STRING,
  name         STRING,
  state        STRING,
  undoable     BOOLEAN,
  checksum     STRING,
  started_on   STRING,
  completed_on STRING,
  previous     STRING
) WITH (  
  KAFKA_TOPIC='default_ksql_migration_events',
  VALUE_FORMAT='JSON',
  PARTITIONS=1,
  REPLICAS=1
);
```

> The `version_key` column has the version of the migration applied or undone. Other keys `CURRENT` and `LATEST` will be reserved for internal purposes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `version_key` column has the version of the migration applied or undone. Special values of the `version_key`, `CURRENT` and `LATEST`, will be reserved for internal purposes.
```

Author: Done

  state        STRING,  
  checksum     STRING,
  started_on   STRING,
  completed_on STRING,
  previous     STRING
) WITH (  
  KAFKA_TOPIC='default_ksql_migration_events',
  VALUE_FORMAT='JSON',
  PARTITIONS=1,
  REPLICAS=1
);
```

The `version_key` column has the version of the migration applied or undone. Special values of the `version_key`, `CURRENT` and `LATEST` will be reserved for internal purposes.
The `version` column has the version of the migration applied.
The `name` column has the name of the migration.
The `state` column has the state of the migration process. It can be any of `Pending`, `Running`, `Migrated`, `Error`, `Undone`.
The `checksum` column has the MD5 checksum of the migration file. It is used to validate the schema migrations with the local files.
The `started_on` column has the date and time when the migration started.
The `completed_on` column has the date and time when the migration finished.
The `previous` column has the previous version applied.

The `SCHEMA_VERSION` table will also keep track of every migration change (including future work for undo changes), but with the difference that being a table the tool will see quickly if a schema

> version has been migrated or undone. It will also give us a quick view of the `CURRENT` state of the schema. The major advantage is that the tool will use pull queries in this materialized

Author: I'm not sure about this.

I understand that inserting a row in the stream may eventually be available in the MV for a pull query. So my idea was this:
- Insert a row in the stream for a Pending migration (i.e. v1)
- Run the pull query on the MV and wait until CURRENT is set to v1 and Pending (fail otherwise)
- Execute the v1 migration script
- Insert a row in the stream to change Pending -> Migrated
- Run the pull query on the MV and wait until CURRENT is set to v1 and Migrated (fail otherwise)
- Continue with the next migration script

But you mentioned queries at different times and different replicas. I think even a complete state store clean up would cause this consistency issues because when the ksql node is restarted, it will take time to sync the state store again. Do you have some ideas how to do it?

> version has been migrated or undone. It will also give us a quick view of the `CURRENT` state of the schema. The major advantage is that the tool will use pull queries in this materialized

Reviewer 4: I don't really have a good idea about how to work around this until we have vector clock support (cc @vvcephei) so that we can ensure we're at least up to date as of a certain point

    latest_by_offset(previous) AS previous
  FROM migration_events 
  GROUP BY version_key;
```

The following are the outputs that we'll see on each stream and table, and how the tool will figure out the current schema version using pull queries.

The `MIGRATION_EVENTS` stream output:
```shell script
+-------------+---------+---------------+----------+------------+---------------------+---------------------+----------+
| version_key | version | name          | state    | checksum   | started_on          | completed_on        | previous |
+-------------+---------+---------------+----------+------------+---------------------+---------------------+----------+
| 1           | 1       | Initial setup | Migrated | <MD5-sum>  | 12-01-2020 03:48:00 | 12-01-2020 03:48:05 | null     |
| 2           | 2       | Add users     | Migrated | <MD5-sum>  | 12-03-2020 10:34:30 | 12-03-2020 10:34:34 | 1        |
| 2           | 2       | Add users     | Undone   | <MD5-sum>  | 12-03-2020 10:34:30 | 12-03-2020 10:34:34 | 1        |
| CURRENT     | 1       | Initial setup | Migrated | <MD5-sum>  | 12-01-2020 03:48:00 | 12-01-2020 03:48:05 | null     |

> | LATEST      | 2       | Add users     | Undone   | <MD5-sum>  | 12-03-2020 10:34:30 | 12-03-2020 10:34:34 | 1        |

Author: Yes. CURRENT and LATEST will always point to the same row. The reason is the support of Undo operations, where CURRENT may point to a previous version. We're not going to support Undo for the moment. I left them just for future reference, but now I'm thinking about it, I think only one is necessary. We can add the LATEST pointer once Undo is supported.

the previous migrated version. In this case, it will look at the `previous` column in `SCHEMA_VERSION`, then use a pull query to get information
about the previous migration.
```sql
SELECT * FROM SCHEMA_VERSION WHERE version_key = '<previous>';
```

And set the new `CURRENT` in the `MIGRATION_EVENTS` to update the current schema version.

### Undo migrations

Undo a previous migration is necessary in the application lifecycle. A user sometimes want to revert the changes of an application because of a bug found in it.
This also requires the database schema to be reverted or rollback to the previous version.

The migrations tool allows users to revert changes. Note that undo is considered a forward migration. A new migration file is required which contains
the SQL operations to revert the changes of a previous migration. The file in this case should contain the `U` prefix with the version number of the migration to rollback.

For instance, let's undo the migration version 2 applied before. The migration file used before was named `V2__Add_users.sql`. For the undo file, we should add the `U` prefix.

> `U2_Add_users.sql`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`U2__Add_users.sql`
```

Author: Done

The migration files follow the same `Flyway` naming convention.
`(Prefix)(Version)__(Description).sql`

The `Prefix` specifies whether the file is a new migration (`V`) file. The prefix is used so that we can add other operations in the future, such as undo operations.
The `Version` is the version number used for the schema. Versions will not support decimal versions. Integers with 6 digits are used.
The `Description` is a name or description of the new migration. Description uses underscores (automatically replaced by spaces at runtime) or spaces separated the words.

i.e.
```
- V000001__Initial_setup.sql    # a new version to migrate (v1) with name 'Initial setup'
- V000002__Add_users.sql        # a new version to migrate (v2) with name 'Add users'
```

> It is recommended the user creates these two files on any new migration. The tool will not enforce that. We need specify this recommendation in the ksqlDB documents.

Author: I need to remove that. We were going to support Undo operations, so these two files referenced to the `V` and `U` files. There is one file only now.

### Naming convention

Hope you have noticed the naming rules I followed in the previous examples for naming the migration files. Having a naming convention for files is necessary
for the tool to detect what migration to apply or revert. Naming files are easier than creating configurations or command parameters to specify the same info.

The migration files follow the same `Flyway` naming convention.
`(Prefix)(Version)__(Description).sql`

The `Prefix` specifies whether the file is a new migration (`V`) or undo (`U`) file.
The `Version` is the version number used for the schema. For minor versions, such as `1.1`, an underscore is required (i.e. `1_1`)

> The `Description` is just a name or description of the new migration.

Reviewer: Is there any ceremony around the description, or can it be whatever? It looks like that is how you make those nice printouts when you migrate?

Author: Just using underscores or spaces to separate words. If underscores are used, then they will automatically converted to spaces at runtime. I'll add that comment.

|- migrations/

When the migrations tool is executed, it will look at the `migrations` directory (by default) for SQL migration files to execute. This directory can be modified in the  
configuration file or command line parameters.

If the `ksql-migrations.properties` exist in the root directory, then it will use the configuration provided by the file.

### Command Syntax

Finally, let's look at the rest of the command parameters that will exist to facilitate schema migrations.

```shell script
Usage:
  ksql-migrations [options] commands
  
Commands
  new  <project-path>  Creates a new migrations project, directory structure and config file.

>   initialize   Initializes the schema version table

Reviewer 4: what happens if the user tries to initialize twice? I assume we should detect and fail?

Author: Yes. Although, you know. I think this is duplicated. The intention of `initialize` is to create an empty stream and table schema. And the intention of `baseline` is to create the stream and table schema too but with a version specified in the baseline parameter. Both are similar. 

I will remove the `baseline` and add the parameters to `initialize` to initialize to a specified version if desired.

  ksql-migrations [options] commands
  
Commands
  initialize   Initializes the schema version table

  apply ( all | next | until <target> )
  
              Migrates a schema to new available schema versions (default: next)
              
              If 'all' is specified, then it migrates all newer versions available
              If 'next' is specified, then it migrates only the next available version

>               If 'until <target>' is specified, then it migrates all available versions before <target>

Reviewer 3: I would expect that it would apply all migrations to the target and including the target. I noticed this is also the behavior of dbgeni.

Author: Yeah, I did that too initially, but I thought of keeping the `apply` and `undo` in sync 'cause they have `next` and `last`. Anyway, your expectation would be the same for many other users. I'll make that change.

  
  undo ( all | last | until <target> )
  
              Rollbacks a schema to the previous schema version (default: last)
              
              If 'all' is specified, then it rollbacks all previous versions

>               If 'last' is specified, then it rollbacks the previous version

Reviewer 3: Can we consider `previous` instead? I think this mirrors apply's `next` option better, personally.

Author: Done

              If 'until <target>' is specified, then it rollbacks all previous versions after <target>
  
  info        Displays information about the current and available migrations
  
  baseline    Sets the current schema to the specified version
  
              This is useful when production environments already have a schema unversioned. This sets
              the baseline from where to start applying migrations (i.e. kqsl-migrations baseline 1 'Current State')
  
  clean       Cleans the schema metadata objects                
  
  validate    Validate applied migrations against local files
  
              Compares local files checksum against the current metadata checksums to check for migrations files that have changed.
              This tells the user that their schema might be not valid against their local files.
  
Options
  -c, --config-file  Specifies a configuration file
 
  -h, --help         Shows this help  

>     

Reviewer 3: How feasible would it be to support variables / `--define` as a ksql-migrate CLI option?

Let's say I want to apply the same migration in dev and prod, but the topic names I use are different between environments. If I could specify `kafka_topic='${topicName}'` in my migration, I could reuse the migration with `ksql-migrate apply -d topicName=dev-mytopic`.

Author: That's something we could add too. Seems useful. I'll add it to the klip.

Author: Done. I added the parameter to the tool help.

Reviewer 2: +1, I think this is a great idea @colinhicks.

```

### Configurations

The tool will support a configuration file where all details for the server and tool migrations will be set. The following
are the basic configurations that the tool should support.

Example of `ksql-migrations.properties`
```

> # Server URL and authentication

Reviewer: Is it worthwhile to support these as Docker environment variables, as we do with our general server configuration?

Reviewer 3: This will happen automatically, given the behavior of our docker utility belt.

Reviewer 3: This will happen automatically, given the behavior of our docker utility belt.

Author: Yes, those are automatically supported.

ksql.server.url='http://localhost:8080'
ksql.username='user1'
ksql.password='pass1'

# Migrations details
ksql.migrations.stream.name='migration_events'
ksql.migrations.table.name='schema_version'
```

Note: The command line options and other configurations will also be defined during the implementation.

> ### Questions

Reviewer: What would happen if multiple CI servers tried to migrate against the same cluster at the same time? Put differently, what sort of race conditions can happen?

Author: Locking the migrations stream and tables may help to avoid these race conditions. I need to think how to do that to also avoid locking an object during a failure in the migrations. Say the network connection fails, thus cannot unlock the stream and table.

I am thinking of adding another command to the tool to manually unlock or fix a failed migration. I'll add more info to the KLIP later.

Author: I considered using a second stream and table to store lock information, but it is getting complicated. I tried different ideas (which we can discuss offline), but I can't make it work. For instance, say we have a stream with schema `(id, locked, locked_by)` and the following rows:
```
id,  locked,  locked_by
* 1, true       u1
  1, true       u2
  1, true       u3
  1, false     u1
```
How can I create a table that shows me who has the lock? It should be `u1`. I was playing with `earliest_by_offset`, `latest_by_offset`. Also `latest_by_offset(id, 2)` to get the latest two to check in the application which one has the lock, but I forgot I could have more than 2 users trying to migrate. Without having transactions or a locking mechanism in ksqlDB, this is not reliable.

I think the only solution would be to support `LOCK` in ksqlDB, which requires session connections with the clients. This would let clients lock a table for the client session, thus avoiding other sessions read or write into a stream or table. @colinhicks We talked about sessions before, and I think we need this time. What do you think?

Reviewer: Locking might get really complicated to add. We don't have to solve this right out of the gate, but we should know how it'll behave.

ksql.migrations.createSchemas='true'
```

Note: The command line options and other configurations will also be defined during the implementation.

## Test plan

- Verify positive and negative forward migrations

> - Verify integration with Github and Jenkins

Reviewer 4: do you have a description of how these integrations would look like? is that in-scope here or is that something that each developer would integrate on their own?

Author: Naa. I got excited in this plan. There is no integration. This plan is just run the main use case for having a migrations tool. So just a few tests that write a few migrations script, commit on github and automate Jenkins to pull and test. If everything works, then we're going to write a blog about it.
